Whatever critics say, one thing is certain. These will be the last elections fought under Manmohan Singh. The possibility of Manmohan Singh projecting Rahul Gandhi as PM candidate in a press conference is also highly unlikely; besides these announcements are made from the party forum not by the government.

Politically, it would be suicidal for Congress to make Rahul Gandhi the captain of a 'sinking ship'. Congress think tank would rather like the Congress Vice-President to wait his time out sitting in the opposition or continue rebuilding Congress organisation and re-establish the connect that the grand old party of India lost with the aam aadmi.

The even bigger question that Congress now must ponder over is whether Rahul Gandhi is cut out for the top job at all? Unpredictable nature of politics is what makes it fascinating but at the moment even a die-hard Congressman is not betting on the "Yuvraj" and on a party which seems to have been stuck in some sort of a "dynastic mirage".

Congress star campaigner Rahul Gandhi and whom the Congress unofficially projected as "PM in waiting" during the recently concluded assembly elections simply failed to charm the Indian voters. Rahul's lack of charisma, image of a reluctant politician and top down approach failed to strike a chord among both the urban and as well as rural voters. Congress President Sonia Gandhi has already hinted that party will announce its PM candidate for 2014 general elections.

But is Sonia Gandhi really willing to bite the bullet and ready to completely revamp the Congress? Should we expect only cosmetic changes in the party or will Sonia Gandhi go to the extent of making the Congress a truly democratic party, opening up the post of even Congress President to more aam aadmis in the Congress and herself step aside? And, do these sweeping changes announced by the party high command also mean a non-performer like Rahul Gandhi will be also shown the door? Does revamping the Congress party also mean going to an extent of choosing a non-Gandhi from within the Congress as PM candidate to take on Modi's growing popularity? Does Congress really have such a leader anymore? 
