African nations are not known for peaceful democratic movements but events of last few months have changed this perspective. People of Tunisia, Egypt and Southern Sudan rose to throw out Dictatorial and repressive regimes in a way that would have made Mahatma Gandhi proud. While Tunisia and Egypt grabbed global attention due to their proximity and strategic relations with the rest of the world, the independence of Southern Sudan went almost unnoticed. Egypt is important to Indian foreign policy because the lead role it plays in the Arab world but in today's context, it is Southern Sudan, which holds a more important role for us simply because they need us to develop their democratic institutions and we need them for our energy security. This apart, the huge investment opportunities that the new nation offers us could be our platform in Africa to loosen the Chinese stranglehold and regain some of the strategic space that we have ceded to China in recent past.

Southern Sudan became the newest country in the world from July last year. Nearly 4 million registered Southern Sudanese voted in this referendum, 98.5 % of them (predominantly Christian and animist) in favour of breaking away from predominantly Arab North. Mr Salva Kiir, the cowboy hat wearing Vice President and leader of SPLM, looks all set to become the first president of Africa's newest country. The new country did not lose time to shed the Arab imposed culture and acquire a new culture akin to most African countries in the region. 

As the new country settles down, political, economic and legal challenges loom large. It also faces challenges of transition where India can offer substantial assistance and establish itself as an important ally because what happens in Southern Sudan now, will not only reverberate throughout the African continent for decades to come but also impact the way foreign affairs are to be conducted in USA, EU, India and China. To achieve this, our foreign office will have to play a more dynamic and proactive role - a trait so far not associated with our MEA.
