Voicing is part of the production of vowels also, so in the words for which the Prime Minister is criticised, we have a consonant without voicing occurring between two vowels which do have voicing. But in the relevant contexts, it doesn’t make any difference which consonant is produced. In other places, the difference is important (for example, mat v. mad), but in these cases it doesn’t lead to any confusion about meaning. So the speaker can safely minimise their cognitive effort here and not bother issuing an instruction to stop vibration in their larynx, followed very quickly by another instruction to start vibration again. (I haven’t listened to the relevant examples, but it’s possible that what occurred here are examples of a phenomenon known as flapping, but this wouldn’t change my essential point about laryngeal vibration.)

So why would anyone bother to make the distinction between [t] and [d] in these contexts? The letters to the newspaper linked above give us a clear indication of the answer: such variation in speech is subject to very strong social judgments. If the speaker is trying to project themselves in a certain way, then they will have to devote the cognitive resources to ensuring that their timing of articulatory gestures remains precise. And there is excellent evidence available, stretching back several decades, that this is indeed what occurs.

Allan Bell examined the speech of news readers in New Zealand, and found that the same readers reading the same stories in the same studio had up to 20% variation in their occurrence of intervocalic voicing (the technical term for the phenomenon described above) depending on whether they were broadcasting on the national network or on a local station. Nikolas Coupland reported similar results for the staff of a travel agency who varied their pronunciation of the same consonants depending on the social class of their clients. Bell developed a theory of stylistic variation in language use which takes this effect as the primary driver, what he called audience design. As he said in the 1984 article which proposed this model: “Style is essentially speakers’ response to their audience. In audience design, speakers accommodate primarily to their addressee.”