Sudan before the referendum, was the largest country in Africa, encompassing 25,05,813 sq km which made it 10th largest country in the world. It had a population of twenty-seven million. Its farthest boundaries straddle Africa's two cultural regions: the Islamic north and the Christian south. More than 400 different languages and dialects are spoken among Sudan's 597 ethnic groups. The UN categorized it as a low-income, food-deficit country ranking it as number 147 out of 177 on Human Development Scale. The new country has an area of 6,19,745 kms (which is twice the size of Rajasthan or Madhya Pradesh) and a population of 90 lacs (which is 7 times less than that of Rajasthan). Juba is the capital city of the new nation. Southern Sudan is predominantly an agrarian country and is acknowledged to have some of the worst health indicators in the world. Before independence,there were only 3 surgeons serving Southern Sudan. The country had just one doctor for every 500,000 people (or about 18 doctors in the country). Ninety percent of the southern population lives on less than one dollar a day. The infrastructure such as Roads, Airports, Railways, Hospitals, Schools and communications are practically non-existent and will need to be built quickly if the country is to achieve political stability and economic progress. Southern Sudan has one of the lowest literacy rates in the world and that makes its ability to self govern and manage its vast economic resources to the benefit of its people highly doubtful. It lacks a constitutional framework and in all probability SPLM will govern the nation as per their own rules. They also face an unenviable task to balance the rival and heavily armed ethnic groups in the vast and grossly underdeveloped swamps, jungles and grasslands of the south.

The new country, however, receives strong support from USA and EU for her development programmes. It posses vast reserves of natural resources. According to Oil and Gas Journal (OGJ), Southern Sudan had five billion barrels of proven oil reserves making it sub-Saharan Africa's third largest oil producer after Nigeria and Angola. The magnitude of oil reserves ensures that the country will be able to generate adequate finances for developmental work, if governed properly. It also has significant reserves of iron ore, copper, chromium ore, zinc, tungsten, mica, silver and Gold. Its Timber is well known in the world market.
