Not many in India would know that the settled Indian community here is about 150 years old. The first Indian, Luvchand Amarchand Shah, a Gujarati trader who imported goods from India, came to Sudan in the early 1860s. In 1935, Mahatma Gandhi stopped over in Port Sudan (on his way to England by boat) In 1938; Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru (and his daughter) halted in Port Sudan on their way to Britain and was hosted to a function at the Home of Chhotalal Samji Virani. Shri Sukumar Sen, Chief Election Commissioner of India, conducted Sudan's first parliamentary elections in 1953.India's National Defence Academy (Khadakwasla, Pune) is party funded with a gift of one hundred thousand pounds from a grateful Sudanese Government for the sacrifices of the Indian troops in the liberation of Sudan in the North African Campaign during World War II. The Sudan Block constructed out this fund, houses NDA's administrative HQ.

India already has a significant presence in Southern Sudan through 6000 odd ONGC workers engaged in oil production. In fact India is everywhere in Sudan through the ubiquitous Bajaj auto-rickshaws, scooters, Tata buses and trucks, pumps, Maruti cars, Mahindra Scorpio, Tractors, Basmati Rice and pharmaceutical products (not to mention Indian films). India opened its Consulate in Juba in October 2007, the first Asian country to do so.

The world community is rallying behind New Sudan to prevent it from becoming a rogue nation like Somalia. This augurs well for the region. This is also our chance to engage the new country by helping them build democratic institutions, oil production, and communications, infrastructure and agriculture technology. The mutual economic benefit thus obtained will ensure India becomes a key strategic player. Let Southern Sudan not signify failure of Indian foreign policy to protect national interest, the way our Iran and Myanmar policies have proved. All 3 countries are vital for energy security and trade. We must not fail this time or else China will be too happy to occupy to the vacuum.