Did we really want a Spotify rival from Apple rather than simply this Pandora rival?
All-you-can-eat subscription services are the Next Big Thing when it comes to digital content and we're certainly spoiled for choice. If you're after movies and TV shows then Quickflix offers plenty to watch for a flat rate of around $15 per month (or you might bluff your way into US-only services such as Netflix and HuluPlus). For another $10 or $15 per month you can listen to thousands of albums from the likes of Spotify, Rdio, MOG, Deezer, JB HiFi Now and Songl (as well as US services such as Rhapsody and Google Play). The gadget makers are also in on the action, with subscription services such as Xbox Music Pass, Sony Music Unlimited and Samsung Music Hub.
Cupertino is holding back because it simply makes too much money from selling music to give it all away for a few bucks per month. 

It seems the industry giants are falling over each other to offer us all-you-can-eat content services, although none are perfect and it's frustrating how much content is still missing even from the US-only services. But Apple is holding out on offering a flat-rate all-you-can-eat subscription service. You might argue that it's still negotiating the rights deals, but it's hard to believe that this hurdle alone is holding Apple back when it has so much bargaining clout and others have already struck similar deals. I'd say Cupertino is holding back because it simply makes too much money from selling music to give it all away for a few bucks per month. Instead it's focused on more limited offerings to make sure you keep buying music from the iTunes store.
Originally iTunes Match only let you stream music you already owned from the cloud, which wasn't really much to get excited about. These days Google will let Australians do that for free. Now Cupertino has unveiled iTunes Radio, which offers free access to streaming music customised to your listening habits -- even songs you don't own. It's a free ad-supported service, but you don't have to listen to the ads if you're paying AU$34.99 per year for iTunes Match. The big catch is that you can't simply choose your favourite album and listen from start to end. You can choose stations or let Apple choose songs for you based on your iTunes library, but you can't systematically work your way through the back catalogue of your favourite bands.
Advertisement
iTunes Radio will start life as a US-only service later this year but will eventually come to Australia. When it finally arrives, it's hard to see anyone but the Apple-diehards getting too excited about it. Apple has given the competition a massive head start and serious music fans are already spoiled for choice. They're probably already paying for a service like Spotify or Rdio which lets you listen to albums from start to end. Alternatively they might be using a "music recommendation" service like Pandora or Last.fm which lets you listen to customised channels similar to iTunes Radio. All three learn your listening habits to serve up music you're likely to enjoy, with iTunes Radio going the extra step of analysing your iTunes library.
We lost access to Pandora for a few years due to rights issues, but it relaunched in Australia and New Zealand last December. Right now Pandora offers free unlimited access to Australians without any ads, but that's set to change by the end of the year. Australia will switch to the US model, offering a free ad-based service, limited to 40 hours per month, with the option to pay US$36 per year for unlimited access with no ads. 
So by the time iTunes Radio reaches Australia it will cost the same as Pandora but Pandora will have an established user base and be available on a much wider range of devices including games consoles, set-top boxes and smart TVs. About the only reason I can think of to favour iTunes Radio is that it will be built into the iTunes desktop app, making it easy to stream around your home using AirPlay. Of course it's not hard to send the sound from the Pandora desktop apps, or any other app, to AirPlay speakers using AirFoil.
Dig through Apple's iTunes Radio spiel and it seems the only other key selling point is that it makes it easy to "tag or buy anything you hear with just one click". That's the crux of it right there -- Apple sees  iTunes Radio as a way to sell more music rather than just give you whatever you want for a few dollars per month. That's obviously great news for Apple, but I'm not convinced that it's what most people are looking for from a streaming music service.
Do you think Apple's iTunes Radio is worth getting excited about? Where do you prefer to source your music?